\input texinfo @c -*-mode:texinfo; compile-command: "makeinfo gtypist.texinfo"-*-
@setfilename gtypist.info
@settitle GNU Typist Manual

@dircategory Education
@direntry Education
* GTypist: (gtypist). Documentation of the typing tutor gtypist.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{GNU Typist Manual}
@end titlepage
@page

@ifnottex
@node Top, Distribution, (dir), (dir)
@top GNU Typist - Typing Tutor

GNU Typist is an interactive typing tutor that can help you to type
correctly. It has several lessons for different keyboards layouts and in
different languages. The lessons for gtypist are described in a easy-to-learn
scripting language that the user can use to modify the exising lessons
or create new ones.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Distribution::
* Copying::
* Introduction::
* Invoking::
* Script files and commands::
* Supplied lessons::
* How to contribute new lessons::
* Emacs mode for editing gtypist-lessons::
* Technical Information::
* History::
@end menu


@node Distribution, Copying, Top, Top
@unnumbered Distribution

GNU Typist (or gtypist) is @dfn{free software}; this means that everyone
is free to use it and free to redistribute it on certain conditions.
The precise conditions are found in the GNU General Public License that
comes with with this program and also appears following this section.

@noindent
You can obtain GNU Typist from a friend or from Internet:

@table @emph

@item Primary distribution site
@url{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gtypist/}

@item Home page
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/gtypist/}

@item On-line manual (updates between program releases)
@url{http://www.gnu.org/software/gtypist/doc/}

@item Developers' home page (CVS repository, tasks, support...)
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/gtypist/}

@item Structio-page with binaries and contributed lessons
@url{http://structio.sourceforge.net/gtypist/}

@end table

@node Copying, Introduction, Distribution, Top
@unnumbered GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
@center Version 2, June 1991

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@unnumberedsec Preamble

 The licenses for most software are designed to take away your
freedom to share and change it. By contrast, the GNU General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software---to make sure the software is free for all its users. This
General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to
using it. (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by
the GNU Library General Public License instead.) You can apply it to
your programs, too.

 When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price. Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it
if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it
in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

 To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

 For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have. You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code. And you must show them these terms so they know their
rights.

 We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

 Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software. If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

 Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software
patents. We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free
program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the
program proprietary. To prevent this, we have made it clear that any
patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.

 The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

@iftex
@unnumberedsec TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
@end ifinfo

@enumerate 0
@item
This License applies to any program or other work which contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of this General Public License. The ``Program'', below,
refers to any such program or work, and a ``work based on the Program''
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law:
that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it,
either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another
language. (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in
the term ``modification''.) Each licensee is addressed as ``you''.

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope. The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program
is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the
Program (independent of having been made by running the Program).
Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

@item
You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty;
and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License
along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

@item
You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

@enumerate a
@item
You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

@item
You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any
part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third
parties under the terms of this License.

@item
If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under
these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this
License. (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on
the Program is not required to print an announcement.)
@end enumerate

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole. If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works. But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

@item
You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

@enumerate a
@item
Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections
1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

@item
Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium
customarily used for software interchange; or,

@item
Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer
to distribute corresponding source code. (This alternative is
allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
received the program in object code or executable form with such
an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)
@end enumerate

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it. For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable. However, as a
special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

@item
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License. Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it. However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works. These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License. Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

@item
Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions. You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to
this License.

@item
If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License. If you cannot
distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you
may not distribute the Program at all. For example, if a patent
license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by
all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then
the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to
refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices. Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

@item
If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded. In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

@item
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time. Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number. If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and ``any
later version'', you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation. If the Program does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

@item
If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission. For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this. Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

@iftex
@heading NO WARRANTY
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center NO WARRANTY
@end ifinfo

@item
BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY
FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW@. EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE THE PROGRAM ``AS IS'' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@. THE ENTIRE RISK AS
TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU@. SHOULD THE
PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING,
REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

@item
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR
REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY
YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
@end enumerate

@iftex
@heading END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end iftex
@ifinfo
@center END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end ifinfo

@page
@unnumberedsec How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

 If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these terms.

 To do so, attach the following notices to the program. It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
convey the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the ``copyright'' line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

@smallexample
@var{one line to give the program's name and an idea of what it does.}
Copyright (C) 19@var{yy} @var{name of author}

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2
of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@. See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
@end smallexample

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.

If the program is interactive, make it output a short notice like this
when it starts in an interactive mode:

@smallexample
Gnomovision version 69, Copyright (C) 19@var{yy} @var{name of author}
Gnomovision comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details
type `show w'. This is free software, and you are welcome
to redistribute it under certain conditions; type `show c' 
for details.
@end smallexample

The hypothetical commands @samp{show w} and @samp{show c} should show
the appropriate parts of the General Public License. Of course, the
commands you use may be called something other than @samp{show w} and
@samp{show c}; they could even be mouse-clicks or menu items---whatever
suits your program.

You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or your
school, if any, to sign a ``copyright disclaimer'' for the program, if
necessary. Here is a sample; alter the names:

@smallexample
@group
Yoyodyne, Inc., hereby disclaims all copyright
interest in the program `Gnomovision'
(which makes passes at compilers) written 
by James Hacker.

@var{signature of Ty Coon}, 1 April 1989
Ty Coon, President of Vice
@end group
@end smallexample

This General Public License does not permit incorporating your program into
proprietary programs. If your program is a subroutine library, you may
consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with the
library. If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Library General
Public License instead of this License.


@node Introduction, Invoking, Copying, Top
@chapter Introduction

GNU Typist is an interactive typing tutor program. It uses an input file to
create a series of typing tutorials, drills, and timed speed tests. It
is intended to be used on raw terminals without graphics ---it has been
compiled and used in GNU/Linux and Unix (Aix, Solaris) and also in
DOS/Windows (DOS 6.22, Windows 98, Windows NT).

The program reads lessons written in an easy-to-learn scripting language. It
is distributed with several complete and good lessons, you can use them,
modify them or create new lessons (@pxref{Script files and commands}).

There are two types of drills - one-time and ordinary. In an ordinary
drill, gtypist displays text on the screen, and waits for the user to
correctly type the exact same text, underneath. It indicates typing
errors, and if at the end of the exercise there were errors, it will
re-run the drill, up to a maximum number of tries. In a one-time drill,
the procedure is the same, except that the program will not repeat the
drill if it is not typed correctly. Backspace and delete are not
permitted in drills.

In a speed test, gtypist displays text on the screen, and waits for the
user to correctly over-type the exact same text. It indicates typing
errors, and at the end of the test it calculates the real and effective
rate in WPM. A speed test is run only once, no matter how many errors
there were. Backspace and delete are permitted, but errors still
accumulate.

The top line of the screen displays a banner. The bottom line of the
screen displays a message line, queries, and other status information.
The lines in between are used for the tutorials, drills, and speed
tests.

If a script file is not specified on the command line, a default file
@file{gtypist.typ} will be used. (See details about the path in the section 
 @pxref{Environment Variables}). 

In typing speed reports, a 'word' is deemed to be five characters, so
the raw (gross) WPM is the number of characters in the test passage,
divided by five, then divided again by the number of minutes elapsed in
typing the passage. The adjusted WPM factors in the errors; each error
is counted as a word mistyped.

@node Invoking, Script files and commands, Introduction, Top
@chapter Invoking

The syntax to invoke GNU Typist is:

@code{gtypist [ Options... ] [ script_file ]}

The supported options are given below (note that the long form is
supported only in GNU/Linux):

@table @code
@item -d,--drill-tries
Specifies the maximum number of drill tries permitted. When running
through an ordinary typing drill, gtypist will not proceed past the drill
until it is completed without errors, or until the number of tries
exceeds drill_tries. The default value is 3, the minimum 1, and the
maximum 1000. This value is ignored for one-time typing drills.

@item -n, --notimer
gtypist will display the typing speeds in WPM after both drills and speed
tests. However, the lessons appear to be written for a program that
only does this for speed tests. To make gtypist behave in a manner that
matches the lessons, that is, to sup WPM reports on drills, use
-n, --notimer.

@item -t, --term-cursor
gtypist creates its own flashing block cursor on the screen, to help
distinguish between the cursor and reverse video error indications.
Setting -t or --term_cursor suppresses this, and forces the program to
use the terminal's cursor instead.

@item -f, --curs-flash
The curs_flash value sets the block cursor flash period in tenths of a
second. A value of 0 indicates no cursor flashing. The default is
10, and the maximum is 512. This option is ignored if -t or
--term_cursor has been set.

@item -c, --colo[u]rs
In normal operation, gtypist uses only normal and reverse video
attributes in monochrome mode. This option may be used to specify the
foreground and background colours on terminals that support colours.
The colours are specified as two integers, in the range 0 to 7,
separated by commas, setting the foreground and background colours. The
colour codes 0 to 7 indicate black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta,
cyan, and white respectively. The default colours string is 7,0 -
white on black. The option is ignored if the terminal does not support
colours.

@item -s, --silent 
When gtypist detects a typing error, it will beep the terminal. Use this
option to silence the beep.

@item -q, --quiet
Same as -s, --silent.

@item -w, --wpmode
With this option, gtypist will try to mimic a word processor in certain ways
when executing an exercise. It will treat space at the end of a line as
a correctly typed character, and word wrap. It will treat return at
the end of a line as a signal to move to the start of the next paragraph
if applicable. It will compress multiple spaces into a single
space. And it will skip over hyphens found at the end of a line.

@item -l, --start-label
Specifies the label in the script_file at which gtypist begins executing
(see script files and commands below for information on labels). If
start_label is not given, gtypist begins execution at the first line of
the file.

@end table

@noindent
You also have to set the environment variable @env{LANG} if you
want to run gtypist in your native language. @xref{Environment Variables}.

@strong{Examples:}

@noindent
To run the default lessons of lesson @file{gtypist.typ}:@*
@code{gtypist}


@noindent
To run the lesson in Spanish: @*
@code{gtypist esp.typ}


@noindent
To instruct gtypist to look for lesson bar.typ in a non
standard directory @file{/home/foo}: @*
@code{export GTYPIST_PATH="/home/foo"}
@code{gtypist bar.typ}


@noindent
To run the lessons in the file @file{test.typ} of directory @file{/tmp},
starting at label @code{TEST1}, using the terminal's cursor, and running
silently:@*
@code{gtypist -t -q -l TEST1 /tmp/test.typ}

@node Script files and commands, Supplied lessons, Invoking, Top
@chapter Script files and commands

GNU Typist reads in the data for its typing lessons from a script file.
With the exception of comments and blank lines, each line in the file is
of the format

@code{command_char : command_data}

@noindent
Here, @code{command_char} is a single character code that defines an
action for gtypist to take, and @code{command_data} is data for that
command. If @code{command_char} is a space character, this indicates that the
line is a continuation of the preceding non-space command. The ':'
separator must be in column two of the line.

Comment lines are lines beginning with a '#' character, and are
ignored, as are blank lines. Comment lines may have any format provided
that they begin with '#'; other lines must have the above format.

The following is a list of valid @code{command_char} values:

@table @code
@item B
This command clears the complete screen. If any @code{command_data} is
present, it is displayed in the one-line banner at the top of the
screen, and remains in place until the next @code{B} command. This command may
not be continued; it is a single line command.

@item *
This indicates a label in the file. The label may be the target of a
@code{G}, @code{Y}, or @code{N} command. Labels may contain any
character, including space, and are a single line command. Labels must
be unique within lesson files. Whitespace at the end of labels is ignored.

@item T
This presents a tutorial, and is a multi-line command, up to the
limit of the screen length. Each line in the command is simply
printed to the screen. This command clears the screen beneath the top
banner line. After the display is done, the program waits before
proceeding.

@item I
The I command can display some brief instructions above a drill or
a speed test.  Only two lines or less are permitted.  Unlike the @code{T}
command, it does not wait for any further keypresses before proceeding.
So it should really always be followed by either a @code{D} or a @code{P}.
It clears the whole screen drill area, so it's just like a two-line T, though.

@item D
This creates an ordinary typing drill. It is a multi-line command;
as many lines may be used as available on the screen. 
The text is displayed  alternate screen lines, and prompts
you to type the same text in on the intermediate lines.  Typing errors
are indicated with an inverse @code{^}, or @code{>} if the character is a newline.
The drill completes when it is typed correctly, or after a
number of attempts.  Delete and backspace are not recognised.  @key{Escape}
may be used to exit from the drill before completion.

@item O
This creates a one-time typing drill. It has the same behaviour as
the @code{D} command, but it does not repeat until the text is
typed correctly.

@item P
This creates a speed test. It is a multi-line command; as many lines
may be used as are available to curses. It  displays its text on the screen,
and prompts you to type on top of it.  Typing errors are highlighted in inverse
colours.  You get only one chance at this test, but delete and backspace
are recognised (errors still accumulate, however).  At the end
of the test, the typing speed and accuracy are displayed.

@item G
This causes gtypist to go to the label in @code{command_data}, and continie
execution of the script there. This is a single line command.

@item Q
This command command prompts its text on the message line, and waits for
a @key{Y} or an @key{N} before proceeding.  Other characters are ignored.

@item Y
This is like @code{G}, except that the goto is executed only if the result of
the last @code{Q} command was @key{Y}.

@item N
This is like @code{G}, except that the goto is executed only if the result of
the last @code{Q} command was @key{N}.

@item K
This binds a function key to a label. The format of the data line
following this command must be @code{fkey_number:label}, where 
@code{fkey_number} is
a function key number in the range 1 to 12, and @code{label} is a label to go
to when this key is pressed. A value of NULL for label removes any
label binding from the key. 

If function keys are not available on the terminal other keys can be
used: @key{1} to @key{9} to replace @key{F1} to @key{F9}, @key{0} to 
replace @key{F10}, @key{A} for @key{F11} and @key{S} for @key{F12}.

Other alternatives for the keys @key{F1} to @key{F12} are the
combinations: @key{Ctrl-Q}, @key{Ctrl-W}, @key{Ctrl-E}, @key{Ctrl-R}, 
@key{Ctrl-T}, @key{Ctrl-Z}, @key{Ctrl-U}, @key{Ctrl-I}, 
@key{Ctrl-O}, @key{Ctrl-P}, @key{Ctrl-A} and @key{Ctrl-S}.

This is also useful where function keys are intercepted
by other programs, for example, by a window manager.

@item X
This command causes gtypist to exit. It is a single line command. Any
@code{command_data} is ignored. The program also exits if the end of the file
is found (so if you could also place a label there and just @code{G} to it)

@end table

Here is a tiny example script to demonstrate the available commands
(@file{tinydemo.typ} lesson file):

@example
# Minimal demonstration 
B: Typing tutor demonstration 
*:LOOP
K:1:QDONE
T:This is a small example tutor script. A better
 :example may be found in the demo.typ file that
 :accompanies GNU Typist
I:Here is an example of a drill: 
D:asdf ghjkl;
I:And here is an example of a speed test: 
P:qwe rt yu iop
*:QDONE
Q:Seen enough yet? [Y/N] 
N:LOOP 
X:
@end example

@node Supplied lessons, How to contribute new lessons, Script files and commands, Top
@chapter Supplied lessons

The following lessons are supplied with GNU Typist :
@table @file
@item q.typ 
Quick QWERTY course in English
@item r.typ
Long QWERTY course in English
@item t.typ
QWERTY touch typing in English
@item v.typ
Yet Another QWERTY in English
@item w.typ
QWERTY Review in English
@item d.typ
Dvorak touch typing in English
@item m.typ
Typing drills in English
@item s.typ
Speed drills in English
@item n.typ
Calculator keypad in English
@item gtypist.typ
Compendium of the previous lessons in English
@item esp.typ
QWERTY course in Spanish
@item kt*.typ
These lessons are the standard lessons from Ktouch 1.0
(@url{http://ktouch.sourceforge.net}), which have been converted to
gtypist's file format using @file{tools/ktouch2typ.pl}.
@end table

@noindent
If you find errors in these lessons, if you modify any of them or if you
write a new lesson, please release it with a free license and tell us
about it, by writing an email to @email{bug-gtypist@@gnu.org}.

@node How to contribute new lessons, Emacs mode for editing gtypist-lessons, Supplied lessons, Top
@chapter How to contribute new lessons

@c This chapter has not been written yet. It will give guidelines
@c for supporting a new keyboard and/or language, though all the
@c needed technical details are already given in this manual. 

Here are some hints how you can quickly create new lessons.

@menu
* Ktouch-lessons:: 
* Create drills from fortune:: 
@end menu

@node Ktouch-lessons, , Create drills from fortune, How to contribute new lessons
@section Ktouch-lessons

A very easy way to write lessons is to write them in the format
that @command{ktouch} uses, and then convert it to a gtypist lesson
using @command{tools/ktouch2typ.pl}. This will take care of writing
some loops, ``jump-tables'' and a menu. 

The ktouch-format consists only of lessons, which are preceded by
their names, and separated by blank lines and/or comments (# at the
beginning of the line). So the first non-blank, non-comment line in
the file is the name of the first lesson, and the first lesson
consists of all the lines up to the next comment or blank line. After
the separator (comment or blank line) the name of the second lesson
follows and so on.

This is an example of a three-lesson ktouch-file (excerpts from the
first three lessons of german.ktouch):
@example
#
# Deutsche Training-Datei für KTouch
#

Grundstellung
f f f f f f fff fff fff f f f f f f fff fff fff f f f f f f f fff
j j j j j j jjj jjj jjj j j j j j j jjj jjj jjj j j j j j j j jjj
fff jjj fff jjj jjj fff jjj fff fjf fjf fjf jfj jfj jfj fjf jfjfj

Grundstellung
fff jjj ddd kkk aaa ööö fff jjj ddd kkk aaa ööö fff jjj ddd kkkff
fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jköfd
s s s s s s sss sss sss s s s s s s sss sss sss s s s s s s s sss

#Zwei wichtige Vokale: e und i
e und i
asdf ölkj fdsa jklö asdf ölkj fdsa jklö asdf ölkj fdsa jklö asdfö
das dass lös fad dass lös als dass las lös fad dass als dass dass
ded ded ded dej dek del deö ded deö del dek dej ded dej dek delde
@end example

Once you are done, use @command{tools/ktouch2typ.pl} to convert the
file: @samp{ktouch2typ.pl lesson.ktouch} converts @file{lesson.ktouch}
to @file{lesson.typ}. It is important that the input-file ends in
``.ktouch'', otherwise @command{ktouch2typ.pl} will skip it. Warning:
this will overwrite @file{lesson.typ} without asking you !

You can customize the number of lines that @command{ktouch2typ.pl}
uses for each drill by modifying the relevant variable in
@file{tools/ktouch2typ.pl}.

Obviously, the disadvantage of this is that you cannot make use of all
of gtypist's features.

@node Create drills from fortune, Ktouch-lessons, , How to contribute new lessons
@section Create drills from fortune

Using @file{gtypist-mode.el} you can quickly create lessons with
text from the program @command{fortune} (or the emacs-internal
@command{yow} if @command{fortune} isn't available, as is the case on
windows).

Besides being used for creating new lessons, this command can be used
to quickly create new drills for you to practice with.

Once you installed @file{gtypist-mode.el} 
(@pxref{Emacs mode for editing gtypist-lessons}), you can open a file
with ``.typ'' extension and run @kbd{C-c C-f} to create a drill
(@code{O:} by default, use @kbd{C-u} or @kbd{C-u C-u} prefix to
change).

@node Emacs mode for editing gtypist-lessons, Technical Information, How to contribute new lessons, Top
@chapter Emacs mode for editing gtypist-lessons

gtypist now comes with an Emacs major-mode which does
syntax-highlighting, indentation and has some convenience commands for
counting labels, a goto-label-command, inserting
properly centered banners, special comments and a bit more.

Copy this file from @file{tools/gtypist-mode.el}
(or @file{/usr/share/doc/gtypist} if you are using the debian package) to
wherever you put your local elisp-files (e.g. @file{~/elisp}) and put
this in your @file{~/.emacs} (adapt path!):

@lisp
(autoload 'gtypist-mode "~/elisp/gtypist-mode")
@end lisp

or put it in @code{load-path} (@samp{make install} in the
sources should take care of this for GNU Emacs) and use this
instead:

@lisp
(autoload 'gtypist-mode "gtypist-mode")
@end lisp

@strong{and} add this to your @file{~/.emacs}:

@lisp
(setq auto-mode-alist       
      (cons '("\\.typ\\'" . gtypist-mode) auto-mode-alist))
@end lisp

@c If you want to, you can then byte-compile the file using
@c @kbd{M-x byte-compile-file} (but @samp{make install} takes care of
@c this).
@c All this is also mentioned in the README-section in
@c @file{tools/gtypist-mode.el}.

@noindent
Here are the commands along with the keybindings:

@table @kbd

@item C-c C-g, M-x gtypist-mode-goto-label
Query for a label to go to (with completion).

@item C-c C-l, M-x gtypist-mode-next-label
This command inserts the next label in a numbered sequence of labels.
For example, if you insert
@example
*:SERIES1_L1
@end example
and hit @kbd{C-c C-l} then gtypist-mode will insert
@example
*:SERIES1_L2
@end example

@item C-c C-b, M-x gtypist-mode-insert-banner
This command inserts a centered @code{B:} command. It's centered on
66 columns because ``gtypist <version>'' is in the right corner
(prompts for content).

@item C-c C-r, M-x gtypist-mode-insert-hrule
Inserts a horizontal rule (comment) consisting of dashes.

@item C-c C-n, M-x gtypist-mode-new-lesson
Insert the comments (header) and a label to start a new lesson
(prompts for name).

@item C-c C-f, M-x gtypist-mode-fortune-to-drill
Insert a drill (@code{O:}) with text from @command{fortune} (or
@command{yow} if @command{fortune} isn't available). Use @kbd{C-u}
prefix to get @code{P:}, and @kbd{C-u C-u} to get @code{D:}.

@end table

@noindent
Run @kbd{C-h m} for a complete list of commands and their keybindings.

If you find bugs or if you think there's something else this mode could
do, please write to @email{bug-gtypist@@gnu.org}.

@node Technical Information, History, Emacs mode for editing gtypist-lessons, Top
@chapter Technical Information

@menu
* Environment Variables:: 
* Errors and omissions:: 
@end menu

@node Environment Variables, Errors and omissions, Technical Information, Technical Information
@section Environment Variables
GNU Typist uses the following environment variables:

@table @code

@item LANG

Typist offers Native Language Support (NLS) with support of the
gettext library, this means that if your system supports it, the
language of the messages shown by gtypist can be chosen. By now
gtypist is distributed with messages in English, Spanish and
German. To use a particular NLS use the environment variable LANG and
set it to the appropriate 'LL_CC' combination where 'LL' is an ISO 639
two-letter language code and 'CC' is an ISO 3166 two-letter country
code (i.e. 'es_ES' for Spain and 'de_DE' for Germany). In some systems
it will be also necessary to set the environment variable LANGUAGE to
the same value.

If you want to translate messages to a different language (or if you
want to correct a message), please communicate it to
@email{bug-gtypist@@gnu.org}.


@item GTYPIST_PATH
Lists the directories that the program will look in for script files.
It has the standard format for paths, that is, a list of directories
separated by ':'s. To open a script, gtypist will try the following
paths: (1) to use the script name alone (2) it will append each one of
the directories specified in the variable @code{GTYPIST_PATH} and (3) it will
append the directory used during the installation process (e.g.
@file{/usr/local/share/gtypist} or @file{/usr/share/gtypist}).

@item TERM
Used by curses to manage the display.

@item TERMINFO
This may need to be set if the path to the @code{terminfo} database is
different between the system the binary was compiled on and the one it
is being run on. For example, in older Slackware systems, the terminfo
database resides in @file{/usr/lib/terminfo}. On RedHat Linux, it is in
@file{/usr/share/terminfo}. If the program complains about the terminal type,
and the value of @code{TERM} is correct, check into this.

@end table

@node Errors and omissions, , Environment Variables, Technical Information
@section Errors and omissions

GNU Typist does not go to much effort to minimize terminal output. In
particular, the flashing block cursor can cause a lot of cursor
movement. Using the terminal's own cursor will help if this becomes a
problem.

In speed tests, the program does not allow backspacing or deletion past
the beginning of the screen line, or back through Tab characters. This
is purely to simplify screen updating.

Colour curses modes do not seem to work well with UnixWare. In
particular, reverse video is not always rendered correctly on some
terminal types, and xterms.

@node History, , Technical Information, Top
@appendix History of GNU Typist

@itemize @bullet
@item
The initial program was written for VAX/VMS BASIC by someone at Harris
Corp (Ft. Lauderdale, FL).
@item
D. Jason Penney @email{penneyj@@slc.com} rewrote it for Microsoft BASICA
@item
D. Jason Penney @email{penneyj@@slc.com} rewrote it in C and the curses
library
@item
Simon Baldwin @email{simonb@@sco.com} rewrote the version of D. Jason Penney,
his innovations are described in the NEWS file (versions 2.2 to 2.2b).
He is the holder of the copyright for GNU Typist (that is distributed
under the GPL).
Simon also wrote a version of Typist in Java that initially he called
JTypist but that now is called Typist:

 @url{http://www.ocston.org/~simonb/typist/}
@item
Since 1997, Ben Armstrong @email{synrg@@sanctuary.nslug.ns.ca} has helped by fixing bugs and maintaining a Debian package (see @url{http://packages.debian.org/typist}).
@item
In 2000, Vladimir Támara @email{vtamara@@users.sourceforge.net} and
Igor Támara @email{ikks@@users.sourceforge.net} became the maintainers of
the C version. Before Nov/2000, GNU Typist was maintained as part of the
project Structio.
@url{http://structio.sourceforge.net}
@item
November 2000, accepted as a GNU package! Renamed to GNU Typist (or
gtypist).
@item In May 2001, Michael Opdenacker @email{michaelo@@gnu.org}, who learnt touch
typing with GNU Typist, became the new maintainer. Project development is now hosted on
@url{http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/gtypist/}.
@end itemize

@bye
