\input texinfo @c -*-mode:texinfo; compile-command: "makeinfo gtypist.texi"-*-
@setfilename gtypist.info
@settitle GNU Typist Manual
@documentlanguage en
@documentencoding iso-8859-1
@include version.texi

@copying
This manual is for GNU Typist (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}),
a program to learn typing in several languages and for different
keyboard layouts.

Copyright @copyright{} 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002
Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Education
@direntry Education
* GTypist: (gtypist). Documentation of the typing tutor gtypist.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title GNU Typist Manual
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author Latest update: @value{UPDATED}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
59 Temple Place Suite 330 @*
Boston, MA 02111-1307 @*
USA @*
@end titlepage
@page

@ifnottex
@node Top, Distribution, (dir), (dir)
@top GNU Typist - Typing Tutor
@insertcopying

GNU Typist is an interactive typing tutor that can help you to type
correctly. It has several lessons for different keyboard layouts and in
different languages. The lessons for gtypist are described in a easy-to-learn
scripting language that the user can use to modify the existing lessons
or create new ones.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Distribution::            Where to find gtypist: source, packages etc.
* Copying::                 The GNU General Public License says how you can
                            copy and share gtypist
* Introduction::            Important concepts you need to know as a user
* Invoking::                How to invoke gtypist
* Supplied lessons::        Overview of the lessons in the gtypist distribution
* Using typefortune::       Practicing with text from `fortune' (requires perl)
* Script file commands::    Information about the syntax of gtypist lessons
* Create new lessons::      How to contribute new lessons
* Emacs mode::              Emacs mode for editing gtypist scripts
* Environment Variables::   Environment variables which affect gtypist
* Errors and omissions::    Known problems
* History::                 History of GNU Typist
* Copying this manual::     The GNU Free Documentation License
@end menu

@node Distribution, Copying, Top, Top
@unnumbered Distribution

GNU Typist (or gtypist) is @dfn{free software}; this means that everyone
is free to use it and free to redistribute it on certain conditions.
The precise conditions are found in the GNU General Public License that
comes with this program and also follows this section.

@noindent
You can obtain GNU Typist from a friend or from the Internet:

@table @asis

@item Primary distribution site
@uref{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/gtypist/}

@item Home page
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gtypist/}

@item On-line manual (updates between program releases)
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/software/gtypist/doc/}

@item Developers' home page (CVS repository, tasks, support...)
@uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/gtypist/}

@item GNU Typist download page (sources, binaries and tutorial updates)
@uref{http://gtypist.free.fr/}

@item Screenshots
@uref{http://gtypist.free.fr/screenshots/}
@end table

@node Copying, Introduction, Distribution, Top
@include gpl.texi

@node Introduction, Invoking, Copying, Top
@chapter Introduction

GNU Typist is an interactive typing tutor program. It uses an input file to
create a series of typing tutorials, drills, and speed tests. It
is intended to be used on raw terminals without graphics --it has been
compiled and used in GNU/Linux and Unix (OpenBSD, AIX, Solaris) and also in
DOS/Windows (DOS 6.22, Windows 98, Windows NT).

The program reads lessons written in an easy-to-learn scripting language. It
is distributed with several complete and good lessons. You can use them,
modify them or create new lessons (@pxref{Create new lessons}
and @pxref{Script file commands}).

If a script file is not specified on the command line, a default file
@file{gtypist.typ} will be used. (See details about the path in the
section @pxref{Environment Variables}).

The top line of the screen displays a banner. The bottom line of the
screen displays a message line, queries, and other status information.
The lines in between are used for the tutorials, drills, and speed
tests.

There are two types of typing exercises: @dfn{drills} and @dfn{speed tests}.

In a @dfn{drill}, gtypist displays text in every other line on the screen,
and waits for the user to correctly type the exact same text in the
intermediate lines.
@c TODO: intention is ``Griff-Übung'' (finger exercise)
Typing errors are indicated with an inverse @samp{^}, or @samp{>} if
the character is a newline and at the end of the
exercise it calculates the real and effective rate in Words Per Minute (@acronym{WPM}).
If there were too many errors, it will re-run the drill.

@c TODO: make this less formal
Backward deleting of previously typed characters to correct errors is
not allowed.

In a speed test, gtypist displays text on the screen, and waits for the
user to correctly over-type the exact same text. It indicates typing
errors, and at the end of the test it calculates the real and effective
rate in @acronym{WPM}. 
@c TODO: what is it used for ?
If there were too many errors, it will re-run the speed test.
Backward deleting of previously typed characters to correct errors is
permitted, but errors still accumulate.

If you already made too many mistakes, then you can use @key{ESC} to
give up and start again. You can also skip a lesson by pressing
@key{ESC} twice. Once you complete a lesson, you will be asked whether
you want to repeat it.

@c TODO: indicate ``practice only'' exercises in modeline ?
There are also ``practice only'' exercises (of both drills and speed tests)
which you won't have to repeat at all. But we won't tell you when this
is the case, so you'll have to give your best anyway ;-)

In typing speed reports, a @dfn{word} is deemed to be five characters, so
the raw (gross) @acronym{WPM} is the number of characters in the test passage,
divided by five, then divided again by the number of minutes elapsed in
typing the passage. The adjusted @acronym{WPM} factors in the errors; each error
is counted as a mistyped word.

@node Invoking, Supplied lessons, Introduction, Top
@chapter Invoking

The syntax to invoke GNU Typist is:

@code{gtypist [ Options... ] [ script_file ]}

The supported options are given below (note that the long form is
not supported on DOS):

@table @code

@item -e, --error-max
Specifies the default maximum error percentage.  The default value is
3.0 and it must be between 0.0 and 100.0. There is a corresponding
script file command (@pxref{Script file commands}) which only
overrides this if it is @emph{stricter} (smaller). This value is
ignored for ``practice only'' drills.

@item -n, --notimer
gtypist will display the typing speeds in @acronym{WPM} after both drills and speed
tests. However, the lessons appear to be written for a program that
only does this for speed tests. To make gtypist behave in a manner that
matches the lessons, that is, to sup @acronym{WPM} reports on drills, use
@option{-n} or @option{--notimer}.

@item -t, --term-cursor
gtypist creates its own flashing block cursor on the screen, to help
distinguish between the cursor and reverse video error indications.
Setting @option{-t} or @option{--term-cursor} suppresses this,
and forces the program to use the terminal's cursor instead.

@item -f, --curs-flash
Sets the block cursor flash period in tenths of a
second. A value of 0 indicates no cursor flashing. The default is
10, and the maximum is 512. This option is ignored if @option{-t} or
@option{--term-cursor} has been set.

@item -c, --colo[u]rs
In normal operation, gtypist uses only normal and reverse video
attributes in monochrome mode. This option may be used to specify the
foreground and background colours on terminals that support colours.
The colours are specified as two integers, in the range 0 to 7,
separated by commas, setting the foreground and background colours. The
colour codes 0 to 7 indicate black, red, green, yellow, blue, magenta,
cyan, and white respectively. The default colours string is 7,0 -
white on black. The option is ignored if the terminal does not support
colours.

@item -s, --silent 
When gtypist detects a typing error, it will beep the terminal. Use this
option to silence the beep.

@item -q, --quiet
Same as @option{-s} or @option{--silent}.

@item -w, --wpmode
With this option, gtypist will try to mimic a word processor in certain ways
when executing an exercise. It will treat space at the end of a line as
a correctly typed character, and word wrap. It will treat return at
the end of a line as a signal to move to the start of the next paragraph
if applicable. It will compress multiple spaces into a single
space. And it will skip over hyphens found at the end of a line.

@item -l, --start-label
Specifies the label in the script file at which gtypist begins executing
(see script files and commands below for information on labels). If
this option is not used, gtypist begins execution at the first line of
the file.

@item -k, --no-skip
Prohibit the user from skipping lessons or exiting from lessons via
@key{ESC ESC}.

@end table

@noindent
You also have to set the environment variable @env{LANG} if you
want to run gtypist in your native language. @xref{Environment Variables}.

@noindent
In some languages like French, some interface messages are longer than
in English. Therefore, you may need to make your terminal larger
before invoking the tool. Otherwise, the text on the lower left
may overlap with the string on the lower right.

@strong{Examples:}

@noindent
To run the default lessons of lesson @file{gtypist.typ}:@*
@code{gtypist}


@noindent
To run the lesson in Spanish: @*
@code{gtypist esp.typ}


@noindent
To instruct gtypist to look for lesson bar.typ in a non
standard directory @file{/home/foo}: @*
@code{export GTYPIST_PATH="/home/foo"}
@code{gtypist bar.typ}


@noindent
To run the lessons in the file @file{test.typ} of directory @file{/tmp},
starting at label @code{TEST1}, using the terminal's cursor, and running
silently:@*
@code{gtypist -t -q -l TEST1 /tmp/test.typ}

@node Supplied lessons, Using typefortune, Invoking, Top
@chapter Supplied lessons

The following lessons are supplied with GNU Typist :
@table @file
@item q.typ 
Quick QWERTY course in English
@item r.typ
Long QWERTY course in English
@item t.typ
QWERTY touch typing in English
@item v.typ
Yet Another QWERTY in English
@item w.typ
QWERTY Review in English
@item d.typ
Dvorak touch typing in English
@item m.typ
Typing drills in English
@item s.typ
Speed drills in English
@item n.typ
Calculator keypad in English
@item gtypist.typ
Compendium of all previous lessons in English
@item esp.typ
QWERTY course in Spanish
@item cz.typ
Lessons in Czech
@item kt*.typ
These lessons are the standard lessons from
@uref{http://ktouch.sourceforge.net/, Ktouch 1.0},
which have been converted to
gtypist's file format using @file{tools/ktouch2typ.pl}.

The files are called @file{ktde.typ} (@file{german.ktouch}),
@file{kten.typ} (@file{english.ktouch}),
@file{ktfr.typ} (@file{french.ktouch}),
@file{ktlecten.typ} (@file{lecture_en.ktouch}),
@file{ktno.typ} (@file{norwegian.ktouch})
and @file{ktnumber.typ} (@file{number.ktouch}).
@item ttde.typ
This is the German lesson of
@uref{http://www.pingos.schulnetz.org/tipptrainer/, tipptrainer},
which has been
converted using @file{tools/tt2typ.pl}.
@end table

@noindent
If you find errors in these lessons, if you modify any of them or if you
write a new lesson, please release it with a free license and tell us
about it, by writing an email to @email{bug-gtypist@@gnu.org}.

@node Using typefortune, Script file commands, Supplied lessons, Top
@chapter Using typefortune

@command{typefortune} lets you practice with text from @command{fortune}.

@code{SYNTAX: typefortune [-dslh] [-n count] [-o <gtypist_opts>]}

@table @code

@item -d
Use @code{D:} instead of @code{S:}.

@item -s
Run fortune with @code{-s}.

@item -l
Run fortune with @code{-l}.

@item -n <count>
Practice <count> fortunes.

@item -o <gtypist_options>
Pass options to gtypist, in the form @option{option} (boolean option,
i.e. @code{-o word-processor}), @option{option,value} (option with
value, i.e. @code{-o e,1.0}) where @code{option} is the name of the
option (short or long) with all leading dashes removed.
You need to quote the argument to @option{-o} if you are specifying
more than one argument:
@code{typefortune -n 3 -o 'silent e,5 word-processor'}.

@end table

@node Script file commands, Create new lessons, Using typefortune, Top
@chapter Script file commands

GNU Typist reads in the data for its typing lessons from a script file.
With the exception of comments and blank lines, each line in the file is
of the format

@code{command_char : command_data}

@noindent
Here, @code{command_char} is a single character code that defines an
action for gtypist to take, and @code{command_data} is data for that
command. If @code{command_char} is a space character, this indicates that the
line is a continuation of the preceding non-space command. The @samp{:}
separator must be in column two of the line.

Comment lines are lines beginning with a @samp{#} character, and are
ignored, as are blank lines. Comment lines may have any format provided
that they begin with @samp{#}; other lines must have the above format.

You should read the introduction so that you are familiar with the
basics: @xref{Introduction}.

The following is a list of valid @code{command_char} values:

@table @code
@item B
This command clears the complete screen. If any @code{command_data} is
present, it is displayed in the one-line banner at the top of the
screen, and remains in place until the next @code{B} command. This command may
not be continued on the following line; it is a single line command.

@item T
This presents a tutorial, and is a multi-line command, up to the
limit of the screen length. Each line in the command is simply
printed to the screen. This command clears the screen beneath the top
banner line. After the display is done, the program waits before
proceeding. This is also used to display menu-items.

@item *
This indicates a label in the file. The label may be the target of a
@code{G}, @code{Y}, @code{N} or @code{F} command. Labels may contain any
character, including space, and are a single line command. Labels must
be unique within lesson files. Whitespace at the end of labels is ignored.

@item I
The @code{I} command can display some brief instructions above a drill or a
speed test.  Only two lines or less are permitted.  Unlike the
@code{T} command, it does not wait for any further keypresses before
proceeding.  So it should really always be followed by an exercise.
It clears the whole screen exercise area, so in this respect it's just
like a two-line @code{T}.

@c TODO: more information about ``should be used for''...
@item D,d
This command is called @dfn{drill}, and it is one of two types of
typing exercises.

It is a multi-line command. The text is displayed in every second
line, and you type in the intermediate lines. Because of this, you cannot
use more than 11 lines of drill content.

This type of exercise is supposed to be used for finger training
(i.e. jfjfjjf), but may also contain complete words and sentences
@c TODO: grip
if they are used to practice something (i.e. a letter/syllable/"grip"),
and aren't real texts.

The lowercase version @code{d} is a ``practice only'' drill -
the user will not have not repeat this drill if he/she made too many
mistakes.

@c TODO: more information about ``should be used for''...
@item S,s
This is the second type of typing exercise: the @dfn{speed test}.

It is a multi-line command.  It displays its text on the screen, and
prompts the user to type on top of it.  That's why you can use up to
22 lines of text for one speed test.
In a speed test you can correct your mistakes, but this will not decrease
the error-count.

Speed tests should be used for typing (mostly) complete sentences,
texts or files (i.e. a letter, texinfo/html/tex files).

The lowercase version @code{s} is a @dfn{practice only speed test}:
the user will not have not repeat this drill if (s)he
made too many mistakes.

@item G
This causes gtypist to go to the label in @code{command_data}, and continue
execution of the script there. This is a single line command.

@item Q
This command command prompts its text on the message line, and waits for
a @key{Y} or an @key{N} before proceeding. Other characters are ignored.

As a side effect, you can hit an Fkey if it is bound (That's why
this is used to set the prompt for menus).

@item Y
This is like @code{G}, except that the goto is executed only if the result of
the last @code{Q} command was @key{Y}.

@item N
This is like @code{G}, except that the goto is executed only if the result of
the last @code{Q} command was @key{N}.

@item K
This binds a function key to a label. The format of the data line
following this command must be @code{fkey_number:label}, where
@code{fkey_number} is a function key number in the range 1 to 12, and
@code{label} is a label to go to when this key is pressed. A value of
NULL for label removes any label binding from the key.

If function keys are not available on the terminal other keys can be
used: @key{1} to @key{9} to replace @key{F1} to @key{F9}, @key{0} to 
replace @key{F10}, @key{A} for @key{F11} and @key{S} for @key{F12}.

Other alternatives for the keys @key{F1} to @key{F12} are the
combinations: @key{Ctrl-Q}, @key{Ctrl-W}, @key{Ctrl-E}, @key{Ctrl-R}, 
@key{Ctrl-T}, @key{Ctrl-Z}, @key{Ctrl-U}, @key{Ctrl-I}, 
@key{Ctrl-O}, @key{Ctrl-P}, @key{Ctrl-A} and @key{Ctrl-S}.

This is also useful where function keys are intercepted by other
programs (for example by a window manager).

@item E
This command is used to set the highest error-rate permitted for
the next drill (@code{E:<value>%}) or for all following drills until the next
@code{E:} (@code{E:<value>%*}).

If @option{--error-max/-e} is specified then this command will only
have an effect if it is @emph{stricter} than the value specified on
the command-line.

@code{command_data} consists of the value (between 0.0 and 100.0),
followed by @samp{%} (this is required so that scripts are more readable).
A special value of @code{default} or @code{Default} sets the error-max
value back to the default.

@item F
This command (``set on-failure label'') is used to set the label (in
@code{command_data}) where the user will have to go to if (s)he fails
an exercise.

Usually, this command only applies to the next exercise, but you can make
it persistent by putting a @samp{*} at the end of @code{command_data}.

If label is NULL then this resets the label.

@item X
This command causes gtypist to exit. It is a single line command. Any
@code{command_data} is ignored. The program also exits if the end of the file
is found (so you could also place a label there and just @code{G} to it)

@end table

@c TODO: more examples (i.e. one example for E:/F:, one for a menu, ...)

Here is a tiny example script to demonstrate the available commands
(@file{tinydemo.typ} lesson file):

@example
# Minimal demonstration 
B: Typing tutor demonstration 
*:LOOP
K:1:QDONE
T:This is a small example tutor script. A better
 :example may be found in the demo.typ file that
 :accompanies GNU Typist
I:Here is an example of a drill: 
D:asdf ghjkl;
I:And here is an example of a speed test: 
S:qwe rt yu iop
*:QDONE
Q:Seen enough yet? [Y/N] 
N:LOOP 
X:
@end example


@node Create new lessons, Emacs mode, Script file commands, Top
@chapter Create new lessons

This section provides guidelines and hints for creating new lessons
(or improving existing ones).

@c TODO: better name for ``Design patterns'' ??

@menu
* Ktouch lessons::              Generate lessons from a set of drills
* Exercises from fortune::      Create drills/speedtests with text from fortune
* Design patterns for lessons:: Hints/Design patterns for lessons
@end menu

@node Ktouch lessons, , Exercises from fortune, Create new lessons
@section Ktouch lessons

A very easy way to write lessons is to write them in the format
that @command{ktouch} uses, and then convert it to a gtypist lesson
using @command{tools/ktouch2typ.pl}. This will take care of writing
``jump-tables'', a menu and a bit more.

The ktouch-format consists only of lessons, which are preceded by
their names, and separated by blank lines and/or comments (@samp{#} at the
beginning of the line). So the first non-blank, non-comment line in
the file is the name of the first lesson, and the first lesson
consists of all the lines up to the next comment or blank line. After
the separator (comment or blank line) the name of the second lesson
follows and so on.

This is an example of a three-lesson ktouch file (excerpts from the
first three lessons of @file{german.ktouch}):
@example
#
# Deutsche Training-Datei für KTouch
#

Grundstellung
f f f f f f fff fff fff f f f f f f fff fff fff f f f f f f f fff
j j j j j j jjj jjj jjj j j j j j j jjj jjj jjj j j j j j j j jjj
fff jjj fff jjj jjj fff jjj fff fjf fjf fjf jfj jfj jfj fjf jfjfj

Grundstellung
fff jjj ddd kkk aaa ööö fff jjj ddd kkk aaa ööö fff jjj ddd kkkff
fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jkö fda jköfd
s s s s s s sss sss sss s s s s s s sss sss sss s s s s s s s sss

#Zwei wichtige Vokale: e und i
e und i
asdf ölkj fdsa jklö asdf ölkj fdsa jklö asdf ölkj fdsa jklö asdfö
das dass lös fad dass lös als dass las lös fad dass als dass dass
ded ded ded dej dek del deö ded deö del dek dej ded dej dek delde
@end example

Once you are done, use @command{tools/ktouch2typ.pl} to convert the
file: @samp{ktouch2typ.pl lesson.ktouch} converts @file{lesson.ktouch}
to @file{lesson.typ}. It is important that the input file ends in
@samp{.ktouch}, otherwise @command{ktouch2typ.pl} will skip it. Warning:
this will overwrite @file{lesson.typ} without asking you !

You can customize the number of lines that @command{ktouch2typ.pl}
uses for each drill by modifying the relevant variable in
@file{tools/ktouch2typ.pl}.

Obviously, the disadvantage of this is that you cannot make use of all
of gtypist's features (but the output file is very readable, so you
can edit it to use more of gtypist's features).

@node Exercises from fortune, Ktouch lessons, Design patterns for lessons, Create new lessons
@section Exercises from fortune

Using @file{gtypist-mode.el} you can quickly create lessons with text
from the program @command{fortune} (or the emacs-internal
@command{yow} if @command{fortune} isn't available, as is usually the
case on Windows).

Once you installed @file{gtypist-mode.el} 
(@pxref{Emacs mode}), you can open a file
with the @samp{.typ} extension and run @kbd{C-c C-f} to create a drill
(@code{D:} by default, use @kbd{C-u} or @kbd{C-u C-u} prefix to
change).

@node Design patterns for lessons, Exercises from fortune, , Create new lessons
@section Design patterns for lessons

@subsection Structure of lesson files

@itemize @bullet
@item Use mixture of drills and speed tests (this is more fun for the user)
@item Use some ``practice-only'' exercises (@code{d:}/@code{s:})
(possibly mixed with ``real'' exercises) followed by a ``final test''.
@file{esp.typ} uses this scheme.

@end itemize

@subsection Patterns for exercises

@itemize @bullet
@item When introducing a new key, start out by mixing other (known) keys
of the same finger in with the new key in the first drill(s).
Here is an example (from @file{t.typ}, line 237):
@example
I:Use your J-finger for the H key.
*:_T_R_L23
D:jjj jhj jjj jhj jjj jhj
@end example
@item use 'word, word.' repeatedly to practice ,/.
@end itemize


@node Emacs mode, Environment Variables, Create new lessons, Top
@chapter Emacs mode

gtypist now comes with an Emacs major-mode which does
syntax-highlighting, indentation and has some convenient commands for
counting labels, a goto-label-command, inserting properly centered
banners, special comments and a bit more.

Copy this file from @file{tools/gtypist-mode.el} to wherever you put
your local elisp files (e.g.  @file{~/elisp}) and put this in your
@file{~/.emacs} (adapt path!):

@lisp
(autoload 'gtypist-mode "~/elisp/gtypist-mode")
@end lisp

or put it in @code{load-path} (@samp{make install} in the
sources should take care of this for GNU Emacs, or if you
are using the Debian package, it installs it here for you)
and use this instead:

@lisp
(autoload 'gtypist-mode "gtypist-mode")
@end lisp

@strong{and} add this to your @file{~/.emacs}:

@lisp
(setq auto-mode-alist       
      (cons '("\\.typ\\'" . gtypist-mode) auto-mode-alist))
@end lisp

@c If you want to, you can then byte-compile the file using
@c @kbd{M-x byte-compile-file} (but @samp{make install} takes care of
@c this).

@noindent
All this is also mentioned in the README-section of
@file{tools/gtypist-mode.el}.

@noindent
Here are the commands along with the keybindings:

@table @kbd

@item C-c C-i, M-x gtypist-mode-info
This shows gtypist's texinfo-documentation, starting at node
``Script file commands'' (@pxref{Script file commands}). With prefix,
start at the top-node.

@item C-c M-g, M-x gtypist-mode-goto-label
Query for a label to go to (with completion).

@item C-c C-l, M-x gtypist-mode-next-label
This command inserts the next label in a numbered sequence of labels.
For example, if you insert
@example
*:SERIES1_L1
@end example
and hit @kbd{C-c C-l} then gtypist-mode will insert
@example
*:SERIES1_L2
@end example

@item C-c C-b, M-x gtypist-mode-insert-banner
This command inserts a centered @code{B:} command. It's centered on
66 columns because ``gtypist <version>'' is in the right corner
(prompts for content).

@item C-c C-r, M-x gtypist-mode-insert-hrule
Inserts a horizontal rule (comment) consisting of dashes.

@item C-c C-n, M-x gtypist-mode-new-lesson
Insert the comments (header) and a label to start a new lesson
(prompts for name).

@item C-c C-f, M-x gtypist-mode-fortune-to-drill
Insert a drill (@code{D:}) with text from @command{fortune} (or
@command{yow} if @command{fortune} isn't available). Use @kbd{C-u}
prefix to get @code{S:}, and @kbd{C-u C-u} to get @code{d:}.

@end table

@noindent
Run @kbd{C-h m} for a complete list of commands and their keybindings.

If you find bugs or if you think there's something else this mode could
do, please write to @email{bug-gtypist@@gnu.org}.

@node Environment Variables, Errors and omissions, Emacs mode, Top
@chapter Environment Variables
GNU Typist uses the following environment variables:

@table @code

@item LANG

GNU Typist offers Native Language Support (NLS) with support of the
gettext library, this means that if your system supports it, the
language of the messages shown by gtypist can be chosen. By now
gtypist is distributed with messages in English, Czech, Finnish, French,
German and Spanish.
To use a particular NLS use the environment variable LANG and
set it to the appropriate @samp{LL_CC} combination where @samp{LL} is an ISO 639
two-letter language code and @samp{CC} is an ISO 3166 two-letter country
code (e.g. @samp{es_ES} for Spain and @code{de_DE} for Germany). In some systems
it will be also necessary to set the environment variable LANGUAGE to
the same value.

If you want to translate messages to a different language (or if you
want to correct a message), please communicate it to
@email{bug-gtypist@@gnu.org}.


@item GTYPIST_PATH
Lists the directories that the program will look in for script files.
It has the standard format for paths, that is, a list of directories
separated by @samp{:}s. To open a script, gtypist will try the following
paths: (1) to use the script name alone (2) it will append each one of
the directories specified in the variable @code{GTYPIST_PATH} and (3) it will
append the directory used during the installation process (e.g.
@file{/usr/local/share/gtypist} or @file{/usr/share/gtypist}).

@item TERM
Used by curses to manage the display.

@item TERMINFO
This may need to be set if the path to the @code{terminfo} database is
different between the system the binary was compiled on and the one it
is being run on. For example, in older Slackware systems, the terminfo
database resides in @file{/usr/lib/terminfo}. On RedHat Linux, it is in
@file{/usr/share/terminfo}. If the program complains about the terminal type,
and the value of @code{TERM} is correct, check into this.

@end table

@node Errors and omissions, History, Environment Variables, Top
@chapter Errors and omissions

GNU Typist does not go to much effort to minimize terminal output. In
particular, the flashing block cursor can cause a lot of cursor
movement. Using the terminal's own cursor will help if this becomes a
problem.

In speed tests, the program does not allow backspacing or deletion past
the beginning of the screen line, or back through Tab characters. This
is purely to simplify screen updating.

Colour curses modes do not seem to work well with UnixWare. In
particular, reverse video is not always rendered correctly on some
terminal types, and xterms.

@node History, Copying this manual, Errors and omissions, Top
@appendix History of GNU Typist

@itemize @bullet
@item
The initial program was written for VAX/VMS BASIC by someone at Harris
Corp (Ft. Lauderdale, FL).
@item
@email{penneyj@@slc.com, D. Jason Penney} rewrote it for Microsoft BASICA
@item
@email{penneyj@@slc.com, D. Jason Penney} rewrote it in C and the curses
library
@item
@email{simonb@@sco.com, Simon Baldwin} rewrote the version of D. Jason Penney,
his innovations are described in the NEWS file (versions 2.2 to 2.2b).
He is the holder of the copyright for GNU Typist (that is distributed
under the GPL).
Simon also wrote a version of Typist in Java that initially he called
JTypist but that now is called Typist again:

@uref{http://www.geocities.com/simon_baldwin/typist/}
@item
Since 1997, @email{synrg@@sanctuary.nslug.ns.ca, Ben Armstrong} has
helped by fixing bugs and maintaining a
@uref{http://packages.debian.org/gtypist/, Debian package}.
@item
In 2000, @email{vtamara@@users.sourceforge.net, Vladimir Támara} and
@email{ikks@@users.sourceforge.net, Igor Támara} became the maintainers of
the C version. Before November 2000, GNU Typist was maintained as part of
the Structio project.
@item
November 2000, accepted as a GNU package! Renamed to GNU Typist (or
gtypist).
@item In May 2001, @email{michaelo@@gnu.org, Michael Opdenacker},
who learned touch typing with GNU Typist, became the new
maintainer. Project development is now hosted on
@uref{http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/gtypist/}.
@item
In June 2001, @email{fnatter@@gmx.net, Felix Natter} joined
and made major contributions to the project: lesson
imports from other tutors, tool enhancements, new tutorial capabilities,
and Emacs mode.
@end itemize

@node Copying this manual
@appendix Copying this manual
@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::  How you can copy and share this manual.
@end menu

@include fdl.texi
@bye

@c  LocalWords:  xref QWERTY kt
